# Contributing

## Documentation index

Please familiarise yourself with our:

- [Code of conduct](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
- [Code Standards and Ways of Working](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/Code-Standards-and-Ways-of-Working.md)
- [Contributing guidelines](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/CONTRIBUTING.md) (you are here)
- [Guide to Code Reviews](https://github.com/bbc/simorgh/blob/latest/docs/Code-Reviews.md)
- [Github Project Board Guide](https://github.com/bbc/simorgh/blob/latest/docs/Project-Board-Guide.md)
- [Primary README](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/README.md)
- [Talos (package bumping bot)](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/scripts/talos/README.md)
- [Use/consumption of Psammead packages guidelines and package list](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/packages/README.md)

NB there is further documentation colocated with relevant packages and code. The above list is an index of the top-level documentation of our repo (and our sibling repo [Simorgh](https://github.com/bbc/simorgh)).

## Overview

We welcome feedback and help with Psammead. By participating in Psammead, you agree to abide by the [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). Please take a moment to read it.

We appreciate all forms of contribution - not just code. Contribution can include adding documentation, requesting clarification, making typo corrections and much more.

Psammead's "Definition of Done" is not only when a package is published but when all the Psammead packages that consume that package are updated. We use [Talos (package bumping bot)](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/blob/latest/scripts/talos/README.md) to automate much of this bumping process.

Fundamentally, Psammead components are intended to be:

Presentational (most of them, we do have other kinds of packages)
GEL-Compliant
Accessible

### What does that mean?

#### Presentational

When developing and using Psammead components, we try to maintain a very clear distinction between [presentational and container components, as they are described in this blog post](https://medium.com/@dan_abramov/smart-and-dumb-components-7ca2f9a7c7d0).

In summary, Psammead components should be almost exclusively concerned with how the component appears, and should avoid fetching or mutating data. Instead, these data fetching and mutating operations are split out into "container" components that can be entirely separate, and which can provide any necessary data or behaviour to presentational components via props.

These principles help Psammead components to be reusable across fundamentally different projects and back-ends.

#### GEL-Compliant

GEL is the BBC's shared design language. All Psammead components should be built on the [GEL utility packages](../utilities/) defined in this repo, helping ensure they fit within GEL, and in turn provide a consistent user experience.

#### Accessible

Finally, Psammead components are built and tested against the [BBC News assistive technology guidelines](https://bbc.github.io/accessibility-news-and-you/). More information on building components to these guidelines can be found in the [project's contributing guide](../../CONTRIBUTING.md).

## Developing with Psammead

### Create a new package

It is autogenerated via:

```
yarn run create:package
```

### Edit existing packages

1. Find a Psammead component you wish you to work on, in your project from the [directory of available packages](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/tree/latest/packages), or by running `npx lerna list` inside the repo.
2. To install the package in your local development, run:
   ```
   yarn add @bbc/psammead-<component_name>
   ```
3. See the README for the respective the Psammead component, to see the required props, usage example and use-cases for it.

### Using multiple components locally

When making changes to a package locally if you want to pull those changes into another psammead package then the following command will create the required symlinks for you.

Run the following command to link all psammead packages up regardless of dependency version:

```
yarn run install:packages --force-local
```

## The package publish, deprecation, and alpha publication process

<!-- TODO: Add this, also consider where to mention npm linking, either here or in the packages README -->

### Alpha Components

#### Description

The purpose of an Alpha Component is to allow an engineer to work on a component, merge it into Psammead and publish it to npm before it is ready for use in production.

#### Use Cases

The accepted uses of an Alpha Component are:

- When engineering do not have all of the acceptance or accessibility criteria yet but want to make a start on building the component (with the agreement they may need to change it based on the finalised criteria).
- When a component needs to be merged into Psammead and published, then pulled into Simorgh in order to UX review or a11y test it properly.
- This means that an Alpha component does not need a UX review or a11y swarm when it is first merged into Psammead, only when it needs to come out of Alpha.

#### Workflow

- A new component is created in Psammead, the version is set to `0.1.0-alpha.1`, and "tag": "alpha" is added to the publish config in the package.json, e.g [alpha tag example](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/commit/64d7aa18a6b6d0861c9fdcd1b88047e634376bb7#diff-19d4d1f1939749aaffae0b8080cc09f4R37-R38)
- An alpha component warning is added to the top of the README, e.g [alpha warning example](https://github.com/bbc/psammead/commit/eb794cb4b18eb3c0f5857bc5e5476f92fbc7c1cc#diff-4124748292798b73a7d123a33fc255faR1-R3)
- The component can then be worked on, merged into latest in Psammead and published to npm under the alpha tag.
- In order to come out of Alpha, the component needs to have had a full a11y swarm, a UX review if required, and all necessary criteria met.
- The component can then be set to a normal version of `1.0.0`, and the alpha tag and warning in the ReadMe can be removed.

#### Prerequisites & Conditions

- The component can be used in branches in Simorgh that are **not** `latest` in order for UX to review it in a page, and for easier a11y testing to take place.
- The alpha component **CAN NOT** be used in a live/production page.
- Any P1 bugs that come out of the a11y swarm need to be fixed before the component comes out of Alpha and goes live, P2 and lower can be fixed after.
- For functional issues the functionality must work on the biggest browsers on the services it's released on. This can be worked out by looking at a combination of our [browser support](https://github.com/bbc/psammead#bar_chart-support-levels) and browser usage statistics for different services.
